[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: Especially when you consider that I was an atheist on earth before I died, and finding myself in heaven alone was a shock to my system.
[Amit Varma]: Also, the only food available was seafood platters.
[Amit Varma]: Now, on earth, I have been a big fan of seafood platters, but eating seafood every single day was a bit much.
[Amit Varma]: So one day, a few of us went to the head angel, a strict-looking elderly gentleman in a white vesti and white wings, whose name was Seshadri.
[Amit Varma]: I said to him, Mr. Seshadri, Mr. Seshadri, please, can you do something about these seafood platters?
[Amit Varma]: I love seafood, but we are tired of eating the same food every day.
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Seshadri gave a genial smile and said, No problem. Please submit a complaint in triplicate, and I will do something about it.
[Amit Varma]: We duly submitted a complaint, and later that day, we got a memo on the Heaven WhatsApp group.
[Amit Varma]: This memo told us to get dressed and assemble at the main gate at 7.30 in the evening.
[Amit Varma]: I took a lovely afternoon nap, almost too lovely, and then assembled along with other denizens of heaven at the Ishwar Allah Chowk, where the main gate is located.
[Amit Varma]: There, Mr. Seshadri and a group of angels and apsaras herded us into a bunch of luxury buses.
[Amit Varma]: We drove out of heaven, and almost immediately, we were at another large gate, which was painted in red and black.
[Amit Varma]: As the gate opened to let our bus in, I could hear sounds of screaming, as if people were being tortured nearby.
[Amit Varma]: And then I saw a big billboard in the distance, that said, Welcome to Hell.
[Amit Varma]: He he he he, I exclaimed, What's going on? Why have we come here?
[Amit Varma]: Mr. Seshadri turned back from the front of the bus and said to me, This is a treat for you.
[Amit Varma]: You were tired of our seafood platters, so we decided to take you all to eat out for a change.
[Unknown]: And in heaven, the only place that is out, is hell.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Indians don't eat out as much as the rest of the world does.
[Amit Varma]: This is baffling because there are many advantages to eating out.
[Amit Varma]: My friend Kartik Shashidhar has a chapter on this in his recent book, Between the Buyer and the Seller.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the reasons he offers, took me by surprise. It was certainly unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I spoke to him a few days ago. Here's how the conversation went.
[Amit Varma]: Kartik, welcome to the show.
[Amit Varma]: Kartik, in your book on markets, Between the Buyer and the Seller, you have a chapter on why Indians don't eat out more.
[Amit Varma]: For example, there you cite a survey in 2011, which found that Indians spend only 9% of their food expense eating out.
[Amit Varma]: Far lower than the world average of 29%.
[Amit Varma]: So I have two questions here. The first question is, why does it make rational sense for us to eat out much more?
[Amit Varma]: And the second question is, why don't we?
[Guest]: Okay, so rationally, I mean, why it makes sense to eat out more is that like it's simple economies of scale.
[Guest]: So right now, what happens is that if every house decides to kind of make bread,
[Guest]: just taking a very extreme example, which means that in every house, you have an oven that gets heated every day,
[Guest]: which is used to make, let's say, one loaf of bread per house.
[Guest]: That's an enormous waste of resource of all those ovens that are being fired up in every single house.
[Guest]: Instead, if you could have a small number of bakeries or restaurants, where ovens would get fired up every day,
[Guest]: where thousands of loaves of bread could be baked, that would get those breads at a far lower cost, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, it's an enormous cost that like people bear by cooking at home.
[Guest]: Because like, even if you account for all the people's margins and transaction costs and everything,
[Guest]: I still think it ends up being far more expensive than eating out.
[Guest]: And why don't Indians kind of eat out more?
[Guest]: I think the simple reason is that our restaurant industry has evolved to produce tasty food rather than healthy everyday food.
[Guest]: I think at least a large majority of restaurants in India kind of have evolved that way.
[Guest]: So it's not…
[Amit Varma]: That's a standard trade-off you make.
[Amit Varma]: Like even when I think of eating out, I think of, oh, I can eat out, but the food that I'll get will be very oily or it'll be, you know, all those connotations.
[Amit Varma]: There's a clear difference in health and quality between home-cooked food and restaurant food.
[Amit Varma]: But if there would be, and for the reasons you point out, economies of scale, if there was to be a demand,
[Amit Varma]: and certainly I would go for it if you could just eat good healthy food outside for very cheap every day,
[Amit Varma]: why hasn't that market come up?
[Amit Varma]: You know, why is all our food, like all our Indian food restaurants will give oily, greasy butter chicken
[Amit Varma]: rather than something simple that you can just have every day?
[Guest]: So there are two reasons.
[Guest]: One is because of the way the market has evolved.
[Guest]: I'll come to that in a bit.
[Guest]: But the other is that it's like it's settled into that equilibrium.
[Guest]: So the equilibrium that Indian restaurant industry has settled into is that people go to eat out on special occasions or as a treat.
[Guest]: So when you are going out for a special occasion, you don't care about the health of the food
[Guest]: because you're only eating out occasionally.
[Guest]: You want really tasty food.
[Guest]: And so you have all that butter in the butter chicken, which makes it taste really great,
[Guest]: but may not be that great for your system.
[Guest]: But because you're having it so rarely, you don't mind that.
[Guest]: And the restaurants know that the majority of their customers are coming there to have it as a treat.
[Guest]: So if they end up giving kind of food that doesn't taste as good, but is far more healthier,
[Guest]: they're going to lose some business.
[Guest]: So it's a kind of an equilibrium that is a little hard to get out of unless it takes some really big investment
[Guest]: by a bunch of restaurant groups to kind of move out of this and so on.
[Guest]: So that's the equilibrium we got into.
[Guest]: So why have we got into this equilibrium?
[Guest]: So I have this hypothesis that it's because of caste.
[Guest]: So because of the caste system, I think for a long time until even in my childhood in the 1980s,
[Guest]: people would kind of look at eating in restaurants as something dirty.
[Guest]: You know, I want to quote from this episode, from this comic Tinkle by Amar Chitra Katta,
[Guest]: which used to come, I don't know if it comes out now, it was a staple reading when we were kids.
[Guest]: So in that there's a story of a thief.
[Guest]: And I clearly remember this late 80s, early 90s, a wife admonishing her husband saying,
[Guest]: you have dirty habits such as smoking beedis and eating in hotels.
[Guest]: Now eating in hotels or restaurants was being compared to being as bad as smoking beedis.
[Guest]: That was the prevailing wisdom in India back then.
[Guest]: And it was seen as something that respectable people didn't do.
[Guest]: And that's because you don't know the caste of the person who's preparing your meals in a restaurant.
[Guest]: And given how strong the caste system was until a few decades back,
[Guest]: I mean it was really hard for the restaurant industry to develop
[Guest]: because if only people from your own caste would eat at your restaurant,
[Guest]: your market would be that much smaller.
[Amit Varma]: So now this equilibrium seems rational enough to me from a perspective of say India in the 1950s
[Amit Varma]: where most people in the country were basically poor and couldn't afford to eat out too much.
[Amit Varma]: And it was like you save up for a month and then you go for a meal with the family
[Amit Varma]: and then what you want is something tasty.
[Amit Varma]: And equally the caste system was much more prevalent.
[Amit Varma]: So that factor would have played a part.
[Amit Varma]: But then what you would imagine is that as India urbanizes and as incomes rise,
[Amit Varma]: which is something we've seen in the last 20-30 years, certainly since liberalization,
[Amit Varma]: that more and more of India has urbanized.
[Amit Varma]: Incomes have risen where people can afford to eat out more.
[Amit Varma]: And in any case, outside food because of economies of scale should get more and more affordable
[Amit Varma]: and actually cheaper than home-cooked food.
[Amit Varma]: But that equilibrium hasn't shifted.
[Amit Varma]: So why do you think that is?
[Guest]: So one thing I must mention is that you say that people can't afford to eat out.
[Guest]: I think it's a quirk of the restaurant industry that the way it has evolved
[Guest]: to provide tasty food that people can't afford to eat out.
[Guest]: I mean if the restaurants were providing daily food,
[Guest]: I'm sure like for the reasons of economies of scale,
[Guest]: it should actually be cheaper, especially if you were to take into account
[Guest]: the labor costs of cooking and preparing meals.
[Guest]: It should be cheaper to eat in restaurants rather than to eat at home.
[Guest]: So cost is not that much of a factor.
[Guest]: But in terms of equilibrium, why it has not changed is because,
[Guest]: I mean, yeah, you have had liberalization.
[Guest]: A lot more people want to eat out now and so on.
[Guest]: But there's no incentive for the restaurant to change.
[Guest]: I mean, unless you really know that significant, I mean,
[Guest]: how do you decide when to change?
[Guest]: Let's say you're making butter chicken today and tomorrow you can decide to make,
[Guest]: your other option is to make saag paneer, which is like possibly a healthy food
[Guest]: which people can eat every day.
[Guest]: And you have a choice between making these two, right?
[Guest]: You can imagine this being some kind of a game theory kind of a setup
[Guest]: where you have a choice as a restaurant to either make butter chicken or saag paneer.
[Guest]: And you make a choice based on what your larger set of clientele would prefer.
[Guest]: And you have built your reputation so far as being a restaurant which makes great butter chicken.
[Guest]: So most of your customers come there to eat butter chicken.
[Guest]: So even if you were to have a small number of customers who would want to eat saag paneer,
[Guest]: you would still not want to change because you're going to lose out on all these customers
[Guest]: who are eating butter chicken.
[Unknown]: So you continue to make great butter chicken.
[Guest]: People continue to expect great butter chicken from you and so it's hard to get out of the equilibrium.
[Amit Varma]: That explanation makes complete sense.
[Amit Varma]: So I should point out that, for example, the restaurant I frequently order from,
[Amit Varma]: Urban Tarka in Andheri near my house, offers both butter chicken and saag paneer.
[Amit Varma]: But their saag paneer would also not be the homely healthy saag paneer,
[Amit Varma]: but sort of oilier and like, you know, pumping up the taste at the expense of the healthy.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that strikes me here is that the cost of doing business also plays a part.
[Amit Varma]: For example, a few episodes ago, there was an episode of The Seen and The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: where I spoke to our mutual friend Madhu Menon on restaurant regulations.
[Amit Varma]: And the cost of those regulations are insane.
[Amit Varma]: And as we discussed a while ago, and I've had episodes on that also,
[Amit Varma]: the cost of real estate in a city is incredibly high.
[Amit Varma]: So if you start a restaurant, just the land it occupies is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: artificially more expensive than it should be because of regulations like FSI and rent control.
[Amit Varma]: So the result is that having invested so much in starting a restaurant,
[Amit Varma]: the entrepreneur is then sort of incentivized to go for the more expensive, tasty kind of food, as you put it,
[Amit Varma]: rather than simple homely food because he has no way of knowing
[Amit Varma]: if that can reach the kind of scales that he needs to make a profit.
[Guest]: See, one thing, yes, I mean, of course, the regulation on restaurants is insane,
[Guest]: as Madhu mentioned in his episode with you.
[Guest]: But the thing is this, I mean, I think even if you were to take out the regulation,
[Guest]: if you were to take out the real estate cost,
[Guest]: if enough people in India were to eat out every single day,
[Guest]: it would be profitable for a restaurant to operate in this regulatory regime
[Guest]: and still be able to provide good daily food meals and still be profitable.
[Guest]: The problem, I would think, is more of the equilibrium.
[Guest]: Because like, bro, where the regulation plays a part is that
[Guest]: if you want to start a restaurant today where you hope to provide daily kind of healthy meals
[Guest]: and hope to make up for it with large volumes,
[Guest]: the cost of the regulations might kind of hold you back from starting this kind of a restaurant or a chain
[Guest]: and might kind of push you more towards something that's going to sell fewer plates,
[Guest]: but like much more value-added plates and kind of make more profits.
[Guest]: So there is a part where the regulation plays,
[Guest]: but I think it's more of the equilibrium.
[Guest]: Because I think if enough people were to eat out, this problem would get solved.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely. But someone's actually, I guess, got to make that first step and show to the market.
[Guest]: Is there one interesting…
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Go ahead. Sorry.
[Guest]: Yeah. No, no. What I was saying is that it's like a very classic kind of a game theory kind of a setup.
[Guest]: Because like you don't want to make a move unless the other person also wants to make a move.
[Guest]: But both of you know that if both of you make a move, both of you will be better off.
[Guest]: So it's in that kind of equilibrium.
[Guest]: But yeah, there's no way for you to coordinate, especially because you have on the one hand a large number of restaurants,
[Guest]: on the other hand an even larger number of people and it's about people's attitudes and all that.
[Guest]: So it's going to be… I don't expect this to kind of change too much.
[Guest]: But one thing what I've seen is that if you were to look at areas which are heavy in migrants,
[Guest]: so for example, in Bangalore, Koramangala is one area where you have a lot of people
[Guest]: who are not traditionally from Bangalore who have settled there.
[Guest]: And there the restaurant market is incredibly vibrant.
[Guest]: So you have restaurants which serve food from different parts of India.
[Guest]: And the food there is, at least based on my judgment of the taste though,
[Guest]: I don't know what is authentic Odia food, but like the food I've had in Odia restaurants in Koramangala
[Guest]: tells me this is probably what those guys eat on a regular basis.
[Guest]: And like, because you have so many young professionals living there who know the cost of time,
[Guest]: the restaurant market is kind of developing there and in other similar pockets in other cities.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd speculated as much as eating out habits are changing, so are eating from out habits.
[Amit Varma]: For example, in Mumbai, you have a bunch of places which provide Dabba services,
[Amit Varma]: which claim to be and are to some extent good, wholesome, healthy food.
[Amit Varma]: Now they are made outside, they are made centrally, they take advantage of the economies of scale.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, they don't have many of the associated costs that restaurants have.
[Amit Varma]: And they are convenient enough because delivery is really not an issue.
[Amit Varma]: So people can just order those, not have to cook at home,
[Amit Varma]: and get good healthy food at a reasonable sort of price.
[Amit Varma]: But my next question to you is, so we are in that earlier equilibrium
[Amit Varma]: and that's not changing fast enough though in pockets like Koramangala and Bangalore like you point out it might be.
[Amit Varma]: But how have other countries made this sort of transition
[Amit Varma]: from the earlier kind of equilibrium we were stuck in to the one they are in now
[Amit Varma]: where many more people eat out and many more restaurants give,
[Amit Varma]: you know, are on the other side of the healthy versus tasty trade-off?
[Guest]: So I don't know if other countries really haven't done too much research into this,
[Guest]: but I don't know if other countries really ever got stuck in the kind of equilibrium that we have been stuck in.
[Guest]: Because I think we got stuck into this unique equilibrium because our restaurant industry didn't grow along with our urbanization.
[Guest]: So because of the cost factor that I mentioned earlier.
[Guest]: In other countries, I think the way I see it is that it's always been a simultaneous thing.
[Guest]: As you have more and more urbanization, you have more and more restaurants
[Guest]: because like urbanization, as we spoke about in another episode, it creates that big enough market
[Guest]: that you have enough entrepreneurs, big enough for restaurant entrepreneurs to want to set up restaurants
[Guest]: whether it's upscale sushi bars or if it is like basic dal chawal restaurants.
[Guest]: So once urbanization happens, restaurant industry automatically follows
[Guest]: and so you'll have a significant proportion of people living in cities who will be eating out every day and so on.
[Guest]: So that's how it normally happens.
[Guest]: In India, I think because of the cost factor, you had a bit of lag
[Guest]: and because of the equilibrium, that lag has been hard to overcome.
[Guest]: Even though I think people are far more relaxed about where they eat from nowadays.
[Amit Varma]: I think cities, because they are networks of mutual benefit, ameliorate cost to some extent.
[Amit Varma]: They're not a panacea, but it's certainly less of a factor in city, especially the more densely populated.
[Amit Varma]: You go now, you've given the example of Koramangala earlier where you have people eat out more
[Amit Varma]: and you have these specialized restaurants coming up.
[Amit Varma]: Is this a trend you see going up?
[Amit Varma]: Are we eventually going to break out of this equilibrium?
[Guest]: It's likely. I mean, I think what's going to happen is that, I mean,
[Guest]: as you see more and more migration within India, from one city to another and so on.
[Guest]: When you have young people living by themselves in a particular area,
[Guest]: they're automatically more likely to take risks.
[Guest]: They're more likely to kind of see the cost and benefits of eating out versus eating at home and so on.
[Guest]: So the restaurant industry is going to kind of develop there
[Guest]: and then people from other parts of the city will discover this
[Guest]: and the market will kind of expand and so on.
[Guest]: So I do see this as one kind of some disruption that's happening in the market,
[Guest]: but it will definitely take a while.
[Guest]: I mean, the more we kind of mix in terms of people moving from one part of the country to another,
[Guest]: the faster it will happen and the slower that is, the slower the restaurant industry is going to be.
[Amit Varma]: Well, that's a good note of hope to end on.
[Amit Varma]: And I promise you that the next time you are in Mumbai,
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to take you out to eat at a place that is both tasty and healthy.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show, Karthik.
[Guest]: Thanks Amit. Bye.
[Amit Varma]: Bye.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the scene in the unseen, check out another show by IBM podcast,
[Amit Varma]: Symbolified, which is hosted by my good friends Naren, Chuck and Sriket.
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Unknown]: Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. This is your captain speaking.
[Unknown]: Sorry to say, but there's been a slight delay due to the apocalypse having suddenly begun.
[Unknown]: As you can see, there's death, destruction and chaos taking place all around us.
[Unknown]: But don't you worry. Food and drinks will be served shortly.
[Unknown]: And I would recommend checking out IBM podcast to get some of your favorite Indian podcasts.
[Unknown]: We'll keep you going till this whole thing blows over. Thank you.